[https://www.linkedin.com/learning/make-the-move-from-individual-contributor-to-manager/](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/make-the-move-from-individual-contributor-to-manager/)

# Make the move from individual contributor to manager
### Adopting a manager's perspective

Wayne Gretzky played 20 years in the National Hockey League. When he retired, he held 61 individual performance records, many considered unbreakable. Hockey fans call him The Great One. After retirement, Gretzky became a coach, and it didn't work. He lost more games than he won and his players didn't get better. Gretzky didn't make the transition from player to coach. Moving from being a star performer to managing other people is tough. Let's talk about two big mental shifts that need to happen for the transition to work. Number one, you have to see the big picture. You were likely promoted because you've developed your skills, you're a great auditor or teacher or nurse. But now, rather than focusing on what gets done, you've got to think about why. Here's an exercise. Think about your prior job. Why was it important to do your work well? How did you impact your department? How did you benefit the firm's customers? If you prepared reports for departments inside your organization, how did your work make a difference to those internal customers? Now, apply that perspective to your entire work group. How does your group add value? Do you help your company be more efficient, give great customer service, make more innovative products? Through this exercise, you identify the strategic value of your work group. That then leads to the second shift, which is from me to we. This shift can be frustrating. You've been promoted because if something needs to be done you jump in and do it. But now you need to consider how your team can work together to achieve strategic goals. Management is the development of people, not the creation of things. So rather than thinking about how you can be a star individual, consider how the talents of your team can be enhanced and deployed to make the whole group better. As you consider the bigger picture, you realize it takes the coordinated effort of your whole team to make a difference in your company. Wayne Gretzky isn't alone. There's a school of thought in sports that the best individual contributors often make the worst coaches. They often can't see how their skills made a difference to their teams in a strategic way. They focus on developing individual players rather than thinking about the team as a whole. Well the good news is that outside of sports the success rate for newly promoted managers is much higher. Start thinking strategically about your entire work group. Focus on how your group creates value. Soon, they could be calling you The Great One.

**Introduction: Stop on a DIME (describe, inquire, manage, encourage)**

**D escribe**

**I nquire**

**M anage**

**E ncourage**

In their book, "First, Break All the Rules," Marcus Buckingham and Curt Coffman recommend that managers develop routine employee conversations. They tell us managers who use general rules of thumb when communicating with their employees create consistency. This fosters a feeling of security because workers know what to expect from their boss. This is particularly good advice for new managers. By definition, a lot of what's happening to you is well, new. You may not know how to respond to some situations and can easily find yourself in a loss for words. That's where a mental script can come in handy. With some preparation, you help your brain create shortcuts to reduce the mental work in a situation. You come across as thoughtful and consistent and employees are more likely to respond better to your input if it comes in a calm and a coherent way. So let's look at an example of a mental script you might use when an employee's behaviour is not acceptable. When you see an employee in need of correction, remind yourself to stop on a dime. Use the letters in dime to remind yourself what to say and do. D: describe. Say what you see and its impact. I: inquire. Find out why the behavior is happening. M: manage. Help the employee change to a more appropriate behavior. E: encourage. Provide sufficient motivation for the change. Commit this strategy to memory and practice it a few times and you'll have a consistent way to talk with a problem employee. There's significant advantages to having a simple communication strategy ready to use. First, difficult conversations are easier to start. The first few sentences are often the hardest part of any exchange, so an opening strategy can give you more confidence. With the dime strategy, you know you'll first describe what you see. So you can focus your attention on what you see before you start to talk. Now, of course, most conversations don't go exactly as planned, but when we start them in the right way, we've got a much better chance meeting our communication goals. Also, having a general plan can help you control your emotions, so the conversation goes a little more smoothly. Now, you don't want to be a scripted robot, you've got to remain engaged in the conversation and listen to the other person carefully. In fact, the most important conversational skill is a real interest in learning about the other person. But knowing generally what information you want to get and what you want to say can help relax you, so you then engage more rationally in the conversation. Once you have a general pattern for the conversation, engage in shoshin. This is a concept from zen buddhism where you adopt an attitude of openness, eagerness and a lack of preconception. You want to be present for the conversation and learn as much as you can from this exchange. Think of the conversation as a free-flowing exchange of information where your goal is to learn as much about the employee as you can in order to better direct your efforts. This all can be a tough balancing act. You're the boss and have a definite agenda for your conversation with this employee. You need to guide that exchange, but you also need to be genuinely interested in learning more about this person so your work relationship can grow. Having a routine or strategy for this conversation can help you strike the right balance.

**DIME step 1: Describe**

Let's say both you and your coworker, Amitra, are late for work one morning. Psychologists tell us you'll have very different explanations for why each of you was late. For yourself, you'll blame outside circumstances. Heavy traffic maybe, or a sick child. But for Amitra, you're likely to blame personal attributes. You'll presume she doesn't care about getting to work on time or she's always late because she's inconsiderate of others. This is known as the fundamental attribution error. We're quick to use external situational explanations for our own behavior, but we explain other people's behavior through internal attributes like personality or attitude. It's important to remember this tendency when we're using our DIME model, describe, inquire, manage, and encourage. When you see an employee doing something they shouldn't, your ultimate goal is to change what they do and the first step is to describe what they're doing, but if you don't get that description right, you can make the other person defensive. When that happens, you're not likely to resolve a behavioral problem. So let's take another look at Amitra's late arrival. What would be the best way to describe her behavior? Well, to start, just state the facts. The first step is important. Too often, new managers propose a solution before they've even identified the problem, so define as precisely as you can the way this person's performance is different from what you expect. Amitra, I notice you're getting to work more than 20 minutes are our starting time. If possible, say something as soon as you notice the behavior, so the experience is fresh in everyone's mind. Second, share the impact of your employee's behavior. Why is it a problem when Amitra comes to work late? Are coworkers waiting for her? Are customer calls not being answered? At a minimum, remind her that being chronically late causes coworkers to trust her less. After all, punctuality is a sign of professionalism. It shows you're reliable. It's possible Amitra never thought tardiness was a big deal since she's never been told the consequences before. And that leads to the final step, avoid judgment. Your best practice is to assume good intent. The goal is for Amitra to get to work on time in the future, so keep the conversation positive. As you describe her behavior and its consequences, keep believing that Amitra wants to do the right, professional thing. It's easy to fall prey to the fundamental attribution error and attribute people's mistakes to a bad attitude or a poor work ethic. But when you're a supervisor, starting with that assumption can make it hard to coach employees to do better. So instead, focus on explaining how the employee's actions miss the mark. From that starting point, you'll have more success opening up an honest conversation that can result in real behavior change.

**DIME step 2: Inquire**

Have you ever had a conversation that goes something like this? "How was your day?" "Fine." "Are you okay?" "Yes." "Do you want pizza?" "No." Frustrating, isn't it? It's tempting to think the problem is that someone just doesn't want to engage with us. But some of the blame lies with the way we're asking questions. When using the DIME model, describe, inquire, manage, and encourage, to talk to an employee about their behavior, it's tempting to use the inquire phase to ask questions just so they'll agree with our assessment of the situation. "Do you understand what you did wrong? "Will you do this again in the future?" But that kind of questioning won't open dialog so we can resolve the problem. That's why it's important to ask open-ended questions when you talk about work performance. Rather than asking, "You're behind on this project, right?" or even, "Why is this project behind schedule?" which can cause someone to get defensive, try starting your questions with when. Get the person thinking about how events unfolded. Asking when sends the message that you're just seeking to understand, rather than trying to attach blame. "When did the client start to get angry? "When did you start to fall behind?" focus on trying to understand the sequence of events from the employee's point of view. Then ask, "What?" Once the employee has told you the timeline of events, ask what they did at crucial steps along the way. "When the client told you they weren't happy, "what did you say?" "When you realized you were falling behind, "what did you do?" Remember, you're likely asking someone how they handled a stressful situation, and most of us aren't at our best under stress. Our brain gets hijacked by hormones, so we don't think rationally when we feel threatened. So do what you can to prompt honest answers from your employee, and let them know your goal is to help, not blame. You want to understand where the employee's decision-making started to be problematic. Ultimately, you want both you and the other person to understand why they behaved as they did. Finally, ask how with a focus on the future. "How else might you have responded?" "How might you do this differently next time?" "The next time this happens, how can I help you handle it differently?" How questions send the message that you want to support them as they grow. 

Using questions that start with **when what and how**, prompt more than one word, yes or no answers. These questions can make your conversations less frustrating and more productive.

**DIME step 3: Manage**

I am horrible at giving directions. My husband jokes if we want someone to get lost finding our house, he'll have me tell 'em how to get there. The problem is, I drive to my house every day, and I know when to turn and where to watch for traffic. But I do these unconsciously, I don't remember all the steps when I'm directing someone else. Psychologists call this the curse of knowledge. Once we've learned something, it's hard to remember what it was like when we didn't know it. So we don't always do a good job teaching people things that are routine to us. You need to be aware of this phenomenon when you reach the third stage of our DIME model, managing employees. It's easy to get frustrated when others don't understand something that you think is second nature. So let's explore strategies to be more effective when you're giving directions. Let's say you're working with your employee, Maxim. He enters purchase orders into your accounting system, but he keeps putting them in the wrong accounts and categories. Here's how you might manage Maxim's behavior. Start with the big picture, begin with why. Does Maxim know who uses the information in the system or what happens when it's wrong? Well this may seem obvious to someone who knows how your company's accounting system works, but Maxim might not have that perspective. Give him context so he understands the impact his work has on others. Next, evaluate Maxim's knowledge and skills. When there's a performance problem, it could be because of the employee's attitude. But it may also be due to a lack of knowledge or skill. Does Maxim have access to the correct account numbers? Does he know the right procedure for entering purchase orders? Be genuine when you ask, it's easy to adopt a tone that implies Maxim should know these things. Just make sure he has what he needs to do the work. Then set performance goals. One good strategy is shaping behaviour. This is a series of small goals to get the person's performance where you ultimately want it to be. So have Maxim work for a 5% reduction in errors in the first two weeks. Then try for another 10% reduction for the next two weeks, and so on. Within a couple of months, Maxim should have the performance you want to see. Once you and Maxim agree to his first performance goal, ask how he plans to achieve it? If necessary, help him figure out strategies to improve. But make sure he develops his own action plan, this helps Maxim feel more confident. For this to work, you need regular follow-up communication. Before leaving the meeting, set a time to check and see how he's doing. When you tell him when you'll follow-up, you avoid the practice of gotcha management, where try to catch your employees doing something wrong. No one responds well to that. Telling Maxim when you'll talk again helps him relax and focus on his goals. Directing employee's behaviour is a process not a one time conversation. So as you address why the work is important, make sure the employee has necessary knowledge and skills and set up goals and a follow-up plan. Remember to celebrate small wins along the way. Congratulate Maxim on his improvements, and also congratulate yourself for overcoming the curse of knowledge.

**DIME step 4: Encourage**

I've always loved the stories of Winnie the Pooh, but one of my favourite moments comes from a quote attributed to Pooh's owner, the little boy Christopher Robin. Christopher tells Pooh to, Always remember: you are braver than you believe, stronger than you seem, and smarter than you think. That's the kind of message you want to send to an employee you've asked to try to improve performance. A psychological phenomenon called the Pygmalion effect explains why this is important. Over time, your expectations of how someone will act influence how they actually perform. When you tell someone you believe in them, they're more likely to improve. This is the important last step in our DIME model. You've described, inquired, and managed. Now, it's time to encourage. So how do you show and tell an employee about your positive expectations? Here are some tips. First, express confidence in their general talent and ability. Remind them of special training they've completed. If they have a track record of improvement, point that out. We all want other people to believe in us. And that's particularly important when we're learning something new or trying to improve our performance. So be sure to start by telling your employee that you really do believe they can change. You also want to celebrate small wins. Don't expect instant perfection. It may be tempting to focus on the setbacks or point out when your employee fails to meet their goals. But instead, look for and comment on improvement. We shape others' behavior by rewarding them when they do things right. That's a much more effective strategy than looking for opportunities to point out their faults. Plus, assume good intent. This is the time to put your skepticism aside and assume that your employee really wants to improve. Start with the idea that the person really was doing the best he or she could do. Even if they get defensive, assume it's only because they're trying to protect themselves. When you come to the conversation from this positive perspective, you'll find communication is easier and people's responses are much more constructive. Also, show empathy. Think about how you'd feel if your manager corrected your behavior and developed a plan for you to improve. You'd probably be a little embarrassed or even defensive. Maybe you'd worry about whether you'll be fired from your job. You might worry that coworkers are talking about your failures. As the manager, you want to be sensitive to those fears. Help your employee do better work by mentally walking in their shoes. And finally, remember to think long term. In addition to helping your employees feel more confident today, this motivation strategy builds their self-efficacy. That's our belief that we can successfully take on a new challenge or learn a new skill. As you build employee's self-efficacy, you'll find they're more willing and able to learn and grow into the future. So when you're encouraging, remember, your employees need to hear that you believe in them, that like Winnie the Pooh, they are braver than they believe, stronger than they seem, and smarter than they think.

**Delegating work effectively**

You can't do everything you want to do and that's never more true than when you're becoming a supervisor. You're going to need help to get everything done. You'll need to delegate at least some of the work you've been doing to others on your team. Delegation doesn't come naturally to most of us. After all, you likely got promoted because you're so good at getting things done yourself. Giving work to other people and relying on them to complete it to your standards can be a scary proposition. So let's talk about ways you can get more comfortable giving work to other people. First, think strategically about delegating. Sure, you're trying to free up your time to work on other things, but there are even more important reasons to share your workload. You're developing skills within your team, making the group more valuable and even when people complain about extra work, research shows that learning new skills really motivates them in the long run. This is a terrific opportunity to get to know your team. Talk to your group about the work that needs to be done. Ask for input on training that might be required or where there's natural synergy between tasks. This is great opportunity to map out your team's processes and make sure everyone understands the strategic value of the group's work. 

Next, **build accountability into your delegation plan**. One of the most awkward parts of delegating is knowing when and how to follow up or to check in with your subordinate. Let's say you decide to delegate the creation of a monthly report to Ronald, one of your direct reports. As you are explaining the process, identify key milestones. For each of those, schedule a check in where you and Ronald can touch base. Schedule in advance so Ronald knows you're going to ask about the project. Then, when the reminder comes up on both of your calendars, checking in isn't awkward. It doesn't feel like micromanaging. You can get a quick update on Ronald's progress, answer any questions he has, and feel secure about the project being completed on time. 

Finally, take time to train people well. Another thing that keeps people from delegating is that initially, it's really time consuming. After all, wouldn't it be faster and more efficient just to keep doing the project yourself? Training takes time and patience that many of us don't have. But investing training time up front will pay off in the long run. Remember, **one key reason you're delegating is to develop your team's skills. When you invest time in training, you're not only making your team more efficient, you're also showing your employees that you care about their personal development and want to empower them to do things right.** 

### When your leadership is questioned

The comedian Rodney Dangerfield made a career out of saying, "I get no respect, no respect at all." He was a funny guy. But when you're a new supervisor, employees who don't respect you are no laughing matter. While some employees will openly challenge your authority, most of the time, it's subtle. Insubordination or defying authority can look like somebody being ambitious or a self-starter when they make decisions or commit the team's resources without you. A person who takes over your team meeting may say he's just trying to help. Or maybe it's nonverbal, where the employee sits with her arms crossed and rolls her eyes when you lay out your vision for a project. The one that makes me cranky is when employees tell me what they're going to do rather than asking. "I'm going to take next week off. "See you on the 10th." (scoffs) Here's some tips to recalibrate these relationships. First, in a private conversation, tell the employee why their behavior is a problem for the team. It's important to focus on the work and not make it about your personal relationship with this person. For example, "When you told purchasing "we would finish our report by Wednesday, "you're promising something we just can't deliver." Or, "When you sit with a defensive posture "and don't contribute in meetings, "it hurts our team dynamic and makes us less effective." In these conversations, be assertive and confident. Remind the employee that your job is to delegate work and make the team function successfully. Use a firm but neutral tone. Explain that their behavior hurts the team. If this kind of communication doesn't come naturally to you, develop a few key phrases that you can use to remind the team that you're in charge. Try, "Let's review the kinds of decisions "you can make alone and those I need to be involved in." Or "My responsibility is the success of the team." Or "Let me reinforce our strategy." Next, invite the employee to offer feedback on your proposal. This may seem counterintuitive, but hear me out. This process gives you a lot of insight into your problem employee. Emphasize that your primary goal is for the entire team to do good work. Ask the employee what she would do differently on this project. Or invite them to explain where he sees roadblocks to your proposal. Most of the time, you learn the employee just needs more information or insight. That's pretty simple to handle. Or they may have information you don't, so you can incorporate that into your planning. When you take time to understand their reservations while making it clear that your top priority is the good of the team, you focus both you and your employee on getting the best performance from your workgroup. One way to make these conversations less awkward is to have regular meetings with your employees. You may say you have an open door policy, but chances are you're pretty busy with your new responsibilities, so you need to reach out. Make it a priority to touch base with your team regularly. Through these one-on-one conversations, reinforce your top priority, the success of your team. Employees will come to see that your commitment to high standards and your concern for the good of the team are an asset, and that's the best way to gain their respect.

### Talking about money

My friend, Corrine called one afternoon. Our dogs played together regularly, and she had to tell me her dog developed a contagious case of mouth warts. My dog had been exposed, so I needed to keep an eye on her. Nothing serious, but Corrine was really embarrassed and the conversation was awkward. As we hung up, she said, "Well, at least we didn't have "to talk about money. "That would have been the worst." Talking about money is really hard for a lot of us. Some companies even forbid employees to talk about compensation with coworkers, so the subject's truly taboo. But now you're a manager, and conversation about employees' salaries are part of your job. So let's figure out how you can become more comfortable. Start by understanding your company's compensation system. How are salaries determined? What do employees do to earn a raise or a bonus? If your company uses salary ranges, what are the high and low points for your employee group? You'll also need to understand how your organization measures performance, and how that influences compensation. This analysis helps depersonalize the conversation. And that can make your job easier. In most companies, salary ranges are based on how valuable the job is to the company. Even though it feels personal, the conversation is really about the value of the job, rather than the person in it. When you understand this, it become easier to talk about salaries. Even when you have to explain why a good performer at the top of the salary range can't earn more money without a promotion, it's still about the salary system, not about the individual person. If an employee approaches you about compensation, the top priority is to listen. Ask a lot of what questions. "What about your salary seems unfair? "What information makes you think your pay is too low?" Take careful notes. It's not unusual to rush through tough conversations, so slow down. Be sure you get the facts. My second day as a supervisor, an employee named Mark approached me. He said he'd been paid unfairly for a long time, and now that I was in charge, how was I going to fix it? Mark claimed, loudly, that his performance reviews were incorrect and his contributions have been ignored. Luckily, since I didn't know any better, I just listened and took notes and told Mark I'd get back to him. Well a quick read of his personnel file showed a poor performer with a history of trying to bully bosses into giving him more money. My strategy of just gathering facts in that first conversation was a smart one. This leads to the last thing. Don't try to resolve everything in one meeting. In fact, research suggests you have separate conversations, have regular talks about performance, and separate sessions to discuss salary. When they're lumped together, people only focus on the compensation. They don't hear the performance feedback. If you learn your company's compensation policies, gather information carefully, and plan on multiple conversations, you'll have successful resolutions to your awkward conversations about money.