[https://www.linkedin.com/learning/workshop-facilitation/different-types-of-facilitation?u=2106729](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/workshop-facilitation/different-types-of-facilitation?u=2106729)

# Workshop facilitation
## Different types of facilitation

Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video

- Being a workshop facilitator is a very important role. You help people come together to achieve something that matters to them, like a professional skill or engaging in personal growth. How you set up the experience and the way you lead the participants through it is instrumental to them reaching their goals. People sign up for and attend workshops to gain knowledge and improve skills in a shared group process. This means that the facilitator's role actually has three dimensions.

·          First, you're helping people move towards specific goals or outcomes. There's some state they want to reach at the end of the workshop that they don't have at the beginning.

·         Second, you're creating and leading a group process that moves them forward together. This means you can leverage opportunities for interaction and collaboration that will help people shift in a way that they might not be able to independently.

·         Third, you're creating an environment where each individual person can actively participate in and contribute to the process. This requires you to move from being just a good presenter to someone who can bring out the best in others. This might seem like a lot to keep track of, but all three of these dimensions actually reinforce each other.

Now while all workshops share these dimensions, there's a huge range of topics and goals that workshops can focus on. Let's look at some common ones, noting that the categories can combine or overlap. One, there are many workshops that focus on developing professional skills. Things like time management, coaching others, public speaking, leadership, project management, and conflict resolution. These kinds of workshops have specific skills that participants want to learn and develop, which means the facilitator needs to help them learn and hone those skills. There'll be elements of instruction, as well as practice, and the goal will be for the participants to arrive at a shared or similar level of understanding and skill. Two, another similar type of workshop has to do with developing artistic or creative skills, like writing, composing music, dancing, and painting. Again, the facilitator will likely be using both instruction and practice, but there's much more freedom for individual expression. Each participant will likely have a very different and unique experience as they apply what they're learning to their personal project. Three, some workshops feature proprietary assessment, model, or method, that the participants have signed up to experience. The facilitator has expertise and is usually certified in that product. These workshops often have a predetermined experience designed to achieve the goals promised by the sponsoring organization. And the facilitator's role is to take that group of participants through the official and approved process. Examples would be individual and team reports by the five dynamics. Or the purpose, profile, and certification by imperative. Four, another type of workshop focuses on strategic planning and is specific to an established group or organization. The group engages the facilitator to help them work collaboratively to move their specific goals forward. The facilitator is not so much offering instruction but rather creating a process that will help the group achieve its stated goals. This may include making some decisions about the future of the organization, exploring new opportunities, working through some roadblocks, or doing some long-term visioning and planning. Five, personal development is another area where workshops abound and can range from health and wellness to relationships. And from personal finance to spirituality. Personal development workshops usually have a thread of exploration and transformation. So facilitators are creating the environment for the participants to go deep into their own history, values, and beliefs, to achieve some kind of shift. Finally, there are workshops that specifically focus on team building. Usually, an established group enrolls to experience a series of activities that enhance their relationships, trust, and communication. These often include physical challenges that the group must face and work through, such as a ropes course or expedition like sailing a boat together. But can also include a simulated business challenge or scenario. While all this variety exists, and I've actually facilitated every single type, the three dimensions run through them all, making them much more similar than you might imagine. Every workshop will have specific goals, a group moving through a shared process, and an environment where each person can participate and contribute. The key lives in being tuned into your audience and being flexible in your approach so you can adapt to every group's needs.

Facilitating adult learners

Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video

- I have facilitated all age groups, and adults are often the most challenging audience 'cause they usually have a clear idea of what they want to achieve when they walk in the door. They can also be resistant to handing over the reins to the leader because they're used to being in control of their daily experiences. Every facilitator needs to know a bit about Adult Learning Theory, which is the idea that as we mature and leave schooling, we have more freedom for self-directed learning, and we shift to finding solutions for our real life challenges. As adults, we have some internal motivation to learn something simply because it interests us. In addition, as we live longer we accumulate more knowledge and experience, which becomes a resource for more learning. And those flashes of insight are aha moments that happen when we connect things. Malcolm Knowles and Patricia Cross, specialists in adult learning, crafted three guiding principles.

·         First, learning materials should **honor the wide range of backgrounds and experiences** that learners possess, and work for different skill levels and **learning preferences.**

·         Second, learning should allow **learners to discover things for themselves** through self-directed experiences. And, making mistakes should be considered an important part of the learning process.

·         Third, learning should be **contextualized** for how the learner will actually apply the information to their lives, including understanding the why behind what is being taught.

You should strive to include all of these in your workshop, and, honestly, they work really well for children and teens, too.

Frederic Hudson identified that learning happens in life cycles of transformation. These cycles are usually affiliated with life events, both positive and negative. Like a new job or layoff, getting married, or buying a home, and the birth and death of those close to us. These events naturally push us to grow, and we often turn to learning to help us through them. If the workshop is not mandatory, you'll likely find a cycle of transformation behind why your participants enrolled. And if the workshop is mandatory, it's likely driven by the leaders of the organization trying to solve an issue. Organizations also have cycles of transformation, and I find the Greiner Curve to be a great model to help me understand that. You'll find it described in my course on organizational learning and development. There will always be something behind why people are sitting in your workshop, but you may not always know what it is. Even so, it's important that you help your participants connect to their own motivation and the goals the workshop is trying to achieve.

Another aspect of adult learning is that you want to aim for **transformative learning** because it drives real behavior change.

Transformative learning has three dimensions.

·         The first is **psychological**, which is a change in understanding. The tools you can use to create this shift are providing knowledge, information, models, or theories explaining they why of something, and giving people first-hand experience.

·         The second is **convictional**, where the person has a change in their belief system. This usually comes from epiphanies, flashes of insight, and aha moments, which means you need to set your audience up to have them. What's interesting is that insight causes a permanent shift in the brain, and is largely unforgettable unlike learning information. I talk more about this in my course on the neuroscience of learning.

·         The third is **behavioral**, where people change their actions. Tools you can use here are observation, application, experimentation, and practice. All of these help create and groove the neural pathways and habits of the behaviors you're trying to create.

Think about how you can incorporate psychological, convictional, and behavioral elements into your workshop design and facilitation. Understanding how adults learn will make you a better workshop facilitator, and will greatly enhance your participants' experience as well as their ability to achieve their goals.

Best practices in workshop design

- Whether you're designing your own workshop or facilitating something that someone else designed, there are some best practices that will help you achieve great results. These best practices align with the brain science of how people learn, and fall into five main categories.

1.       First, **start with why**. It's really helpful to start the workshop by making sure **everyone knows what the goals or outcomes** are. Even if they voluntarily signed up, it will help to get everyone on the same page about what you'll accomplish together. This helps them align their expectations and makes it easier for them to know how to participate.

2.       Second, **create an environment** where people can connect and contribute. Because workshops are group experiences, you need to tend to important elements of group dynamics. For example, you'll need to help people get to know each other so that they can feel more comfortable participating and learning together. You'll also want to setup the right kinds of activities to bring out the best in each person. This includes honoring different ways of learning as well as levels of experience and skill. Depending on the nature of your workshop, you may need to make working groups that co-create something over the course of your time together. And if people have preexisting relationships, you'll need to be mindful of the impact those relationships might have in the room, both good and bad. Your goal is to create the environment where every participant can connect and contribute.

3.       Otherwise you cannot accomplish the third one, which is **to create an environment where it's safe to learn, take risks, and make mistakes**. This is vitally important because real learning can't happen otherwise. Learning is vulnerable. We might have to admit we don't know something or be open to improving and doing something differently. Even if people are only together for a short time, your group's progress will be much greater if you make it natural and comfortable for them to take risks and make mistakes.

4.       Fourth, honor how the brain learns by **creating 20 minute chunks of content.** I cover this in detail in my book, Wired to Grow. The brain learns best when content is presented in chunks of information that don't go over 20 minutes in length, before you do some kind of processing activity. **You can string several 20 minute segments together to create any length of workshop.** This method not only helps the hippocampus move the content into short and longterm memory, but it keeps the group more actively engaged and energized throughout the event. Even if your workshop is not currently designed in chunks, I strongly encourage you to rework the timing to do so. I guarantee you'll see a huge difference in the participants' learning and energy. Processing activities can be quick too. In as little as three to five minutes, your participants can process what they just learned, and be ready to learn more. Simple and fast activities include a discussion with a partner, doing a quick free write, or taking a short assessment. And of course, processing activities can be longer, with people talking in more depth, designing or creating something, debating or problem solving, and rolling up their sleeves for hands-on practice.

5.       This brings us to the fifth category, which is **empowering people to practice in order to change behaviors and build new habits**. This is where you set your participants' to succeed outside of the workshop, once they return to their regular schedules and lives. And frankly, this is the one that often gets the least amount of focus when it should get the most. Unless we drive real behavior change, what's the point? Yes, people may have had a great time in your workshop and thought you were a good facilitator, but if they don't ultimately change their behavior, it has not been a success. So it's important that your processing activities don't just include talking about the issues or topics, but actually trying to do them.

Whether it's time management, or painting, strategic planning or leadership, there are some behaviors they need to do in order to be successful. Get clear about what those are and have them spend time doing those behaviors in the room. Together, these five best practices have made my own workshops much more impactful and effective. If you're not doing them now, start incorporating these elements into your design and facilitation. I'm confident you'll be pleased with the results.

Building the learning plan and agenda

No matter what type of workshop you're leading, it's important that you're really clear about the issue the workshop is attempting to solve. Your level of clarity directly impacts the experience of your participants. Well-designed workshops have a clear set of outcomes, often framed as learning objectives. They should answer the question, at the end of the workshop, what new knowledge and skills will the participants have? This is essentially the finish line, the end point the workshop will help the participants achieve. Once you have the end point, you need the starting point, which is what knowledge and skills are participants walking in the door with? The workshop should move the participants from point A to point B through a series of content presentations and activities. That's the basis of your learning plan, which also becomes your agenda or time line. As you build your learning plan and agenda, here are some good things to remember.

1.       First, figure out the right order of content. In my experience, I found that there seems to be a right or best order for moving that audience from point A to point B. I do this by asking myself**, "What a-ha moments or insights do they need "in order to create shifts in understanding and belief "that will drive behavior change?" I put the various topics on index cards or Post-Its and start moving them around until the order works**. Whenever possible, I also build in some options that I can use depending on how things are going in the room on the day of the facilitation. Every group is different, and some groups will need more or less info at different points, so I always build in a few extra slides of content that I can hide or show as needed.

2.       Second, brainstorm activities to highlight the learning moments. Once I have the content order, I then start to think about all the different processing activities that would work. I try to be as expansive as possible during this part, because options give me more flexibility and will it make it easier for any subsequent facilitator to lead as well. Sometimes presenting content comes first, with an activity that anchors the concepts in the participants' experience. And sometimes the activity comes first and sets up the right a-ha moments for the content. It just depends. Sometimes a five-minute discussion is all you need, and sometimes it's important to have a 30 to 90-minute hands-on experience. I cover learning design in more detail in my course titled Organizational Learning and Development.

3.       Third, sketch out the timing for the workshop agenda. Once you have the learning plan and possible activities, it's now time to start figuring out timing. This part will take a few attempts, so don't worry if it doesn't come together right away. But it's really important to be realistic about how long things actually take so you're not always feeling behind and stressed out.

**Here are some important things to consider. People need to use the restroom about every 90 to 120 minutes, so you should plan for that. Remember that the brain processes best when content presentations are kept to 15 to 20 minutes, followed by an activity. Among the options for activities, pick the ones that will best move your group along to achieving their goals. And add the time you need to open and close the workshop**.

Inevitably, it's not all going to fit, so now you have to go back and tinker. But don't start cutting breaks and processing activities, which is everyone's first reaction. If you do, then you'll end up with a day filled with talking at them, which will undermine your goals and their engagement. Sometimes you can swap activities. Sometimes you can shorten a section of content. And sometimes you can combine a couple things. For example, I often merge introductions with the first processing activity. And of course you can rethink your learning objectives and narrow the scope to match your timing, or you can ask for more time and lead a longer workshop, or perhaps you can consider a series with a part one, part two, et cetera. The bottom line is that **you want to have the agenda move your participants from point A to point B so that they leave with the new levels of information or skill that you promised.**

**Understanding your participants**

You know, I've led hundreds of workshops over my career. And even when I'm leading the same workshop multiple times, they never unfold in the same way, never. This is because every workshop is a co-creation between the facilitator and that particular group of participants who attended that specific day. So part of being a great facilitator is knowing how to flex with your audience because you're never going to have the perfect formula that works every single time. But you can get really good at understanding your participants so you can make each offering successful. Obviously it's best to learn about your group before the actual event so you can make the necessary tweaks to your content, activities, and timing. And then you'll also want to have some flexibility in the workshop design itself so you can tweak it during the actual event. Here's some things you'll want to know about your audience.

One, **how many are coming?** This will help you think about the right groupings for your activities as well as how intimate the event will feel. As long as you have people work in pairs, trios, and quads, you can create a lot of intimacy even among hundreds of people. And if the group is small, you can do more activities where everyone gets to share with the whole group. There are pros and cons to each.

Two, **what are their ages and experience levels**? This will help you know what you're starting with, your point A. Use it to consider if there are any content or activities you can skip or need to cover more deeply. When you have different generations in your audience, it can be challenging to find examples or case studies that resonate for all of them. This is why I use activities that ask them to apply the content to their own life. This works with every group and they can find some commonalities as they share.

Three, **are they from the same organization or department?** If they are, you can leverage shared experiences, examples, and lingo to make the workshop feel really aligned with their group. And you'll have to be more careful about the relationships they bring into the room. I often ask the organization if there's any alliances or conflicts the group has and also if there will be senior leader in the group as that person's opinion might influence the rest.

Four, **what are their jobs or careers?** Again, this will help you know where and how you can leverage shared experiences and lingo. If I'm speaking to a group of healthcare workers, I switch out some photos and examples to align with their field, something you can do with any industry. Also I found that people from certain careers need more data than others. For example, engineers, medical personnel, and financial experts often need more science and data at the beginning of a workshop. Instead of being surprised by it, I plan for it. I always have a few data or science slides that I can hide or show as needed.

Finally, **is there a specific issue or challenge this workshop is attempting to solve?**

I found that organizations often use learning to solve specific problems, but they may not tell you what that deeper issue is. Make sure you know about any underlying issues so you can adjust the content accordingly. If it's a particular challenging situation, I ask to reach out to a few of the participants in advance so I can learn more about their perceptions and needs. **Often, their view is different from the organizer who hired me and I need to create a workshop that meets both the audience's real needs and the goals the organizer identified**.

All of this preparation will help you make great choices before the workshop starts. But remember, when you get in the room and are facilitating the group, you'll have real time information to draw upon. Use that to your advantage. The great news is that the audience will give you immediate and helpful feedback. Pay attention to how they're doing. Do they look confused? Are they engaged and participating? Is the energy in the room high or is it dropping and getting sluggish? All of these are signs that you need to adjust what you're doing to get things back on track. This is why you want to build an agenda and slide deck that are flexible so you can easily shift as needed. The best facilitators make it a regular practice to understand their participants. So make this a priority and you'll reap the benefits.

**Designing the right activities**

Designing the right activities is vitally important to the success of your workshop. When you get it right, the group has a shift in their understanding, belief, and behavior that they will sustain after your time together. And when you get it wrong, it can cause people to disengage, get bored, and even get up and leave. No pressure or anything. Hopefully as you outlined the content and design to the learning plan and agenda, you brainstormed a lot of possibilities. Let's look at some key characteristics.

First, you want activities that make the learning sticky, which means that people will remember it and use it. One way to do this is to **hook learning onto something the participants already know.** When you connect learning to knowledge, skills, or experiences they already have, you greatly enhance their ability to understand and remember it. The challenge is that you don't always know what their knowledge, skills, or experiences are. The good news is that you don't have to, but you do have to set up your activities in a way that brings that to the surface. One of the easiest ways to make learning sticky is to **ask questions that elicit their own experiences, because they often do the connecting.** And it works with every type of diversity you can imagine. For example, in my Change Quest model workshops, I teach people how to learn and manage change. I've built in flexibility to the activities so that any facilitator can adjust based on what their audience needs. For example, we can ask the participants to think back on past changes that they've experienced, or assess changes they're currently in the middle of, or look to the future and prepare for an upcoming change. This approach can apply to almost any topic, and your choice depends on what is best for your audience and the goals of your workshop. One of my favorite tools is to use metaphors and analogies to help them see how this new content is related to something they already know. For example, you can demystify project management by drawing connections to buying groceries. Most people have bought groceries, so you can help the audience understand something they might find intimidating and complex**. Be sure that you pick something that is a common experience for the audience and not just in your own sphere**. For example, while project management can also be prepared to planning a vacation, I wouldn't use it because there's lots of people who've never flown on a plane or traveled outside their country, let alone their state.

Second, **use activities that work for a wide range of styles and preferences**. Some people love to talk things through, while others prefer to really think deeply about something on their own. Some people love to engage and interact, while others want to roll up their sleeves and create something. While no one activity accounts for all that variety, you can cover a range over the course of your workshop. You can also give choices within your activities. For example, I often create worksheets with key questions. But I give participant a choice whether they want to work on it on their own or talk it through with another person. For group activities, I give them choices to brainstorm on posters or actually build a prototype using provided supplies. You get the idea.

Third, make sure **activities bring out what people are really thinking, feeling, and have questions about**. All that unspoken stuff is often where the real transformation happens, so bring it to the surface. But since people don't always feel safe enough to be vulnerable, especially if their boss is in the room, use activities that allow for anonymous or confidential comments. An easy method is to give people larger post-it notes and have them write answers to key questions you've asked, or you can have them voice their worries, concerns, or questions. Then you collect them from everyone and post them on the wall. Then do what's called a gallery walk so that everyone can read them. This can lead to a really great discussion about the issues or themes that need to be worked on.

Finally, **if the workshop is about producing some outcome, I love using the form of design sprinting that Jake Knapp created for Google Ventures Sprint**. Read more in his book titled Sprint, or from his videos on YouTube. It's a fast and fun way to take a group through the process of designing and prototyping something new. I've applied it to all kinds of topics and forms of workshop. Taking the time to carefully design the right activities will enhance the participants' engagement and experience.